Northern gannets can dive into water at speeds over 50 miles per hour — faster than an Olympic diver from a 10-meter platform. But British photographer Henley Spiers was able to capture the moment a gannet broke through the ocean’s surface in Shetland, Scotland, earning him the title of Bird Photographer of the Year 2026.

“Even in summer, sunshine is far from guaranteed in this remote British archipelago,” Spiers told CNN. “So, my creative engine started firing when the sun ball was visible from underwater. I envisioned the shot of the gannet diving straight through the middle of it and dedicated my entire dive to capturing that single frame.”

“The gannets were diving all around me, but I refused to be distracted and kept my camera pointed at the sun. After a long wait, a gannet finally dived through in the perfect spot and I met the bird as it careened under the sea,” he added. “The moment was over in a split second.”

Winners across eight different categories for this year’s competition were also revealed, including Young Bird Photographer of the Year, which went to 16-year-old Parham Pourahmad from the United States, who captured a great horned owl in the shadow of a full moon.

Will Nicholls, director of Bird Photographer of the Year, said in a statement: “In a world where AI-generated imagery is becoming increasingly common, this year’s winners are a powerful reminder of the value of authenticity.”

“Every image in the competition represents a real moment in the wild, earned through patience, dedication and a genuine connection with nature,” he added. “People will always value real stories told by real people, and this year’s extraordinary photographs celebrate the beauty, wonder and authenticity of our natural world.”

The competition, returning for its 11th year, celebrates the best of bird photography across the globe and also supports conservation efforts.

This year, it donated more than £5,000 ($6,700) to Birds on the Brink, a charity that provides grants to grassroots bird conservation work across the globe.

Speaking to CNN, Nicholls said that in addition to monetary support, strong imagery plays a vital role in protecting birds by generating awareness. “Without public support, conservation efforts often fall flat,” he said.

“Our competition promotes birds through exposing people to the wide variety of bird life on this planet and providing them a real connection to the natural world.”